                                                                                       ONLINE ICRC
                                                                                               ICRC 2021
                                                                                                    2021
                                                                                                  THE ASTROPARTICLE PHYSICS CONFERENCE
                                                                                                                      Berlin | Ger many
                                                                                                THE ASTROPARTICLE PHYSICS CONFERENCE
                                                                                                                    Ber37
                                                                                                                       lin International
                                                                                                                          th
                                                                                                                             | Ger many
                                                                                                                   Cosmic Ray Conference
                                                                                                                          12–23 July 2021




Development and Production of Modular Cosmic Ray
Telescopes




                                                                                                                                            PoS(ICRC2021)1257
X. He,𝑎,∗ C. Butler,𝑎 S. Syed,𝑎 E. Potdevin,𝑎 P. Tarrant,𝑎 N. Chen𝑏 and T.-C. Wei𝑏
 𝑎 Georgia State University,

   25 Park Place, Atlanta, USA
 𝑏 Northwestern Polytechnical University,

   Xian, China
   E-mail: xhe@gsu.edu


   While the quest of searching for the origins of the most energetic cosmic rays and the associated
   dynamics continues, there is a growing interest in recent years of the use of the cosmic rays for
   practical applications following the advancement of particle detection technologies. One of these
   important applications is to study the correlations between the cosmic ray flux variations and the
   space and earth weather at global scale in real-time at low cost. Key to these efforts is improving
   the understanding the correlation patterns to increase the accuracy, reliability, and timeliness of
   space-earth-weather forecasts. A state-of-the-art portable and modular cosmic ray muon and
   neutron detector prototype has been developed at Georgia State University for the measurement of
   cosmic ray muon and neutron flux variations simultaneously. The detector consists of three layers
   of plastic scintillator and a neutron-cell with liquid scintillator mounted on an extruded aluminum
   frame. The scintillation light is collected through embedded wavelength shifting fiber which is
   coupled to silicon photomultipliers (SiPM) for signal readout. The modular, portable and low cost
   nature of this cosmic ray telescope provides a technological choice to quantify the cosmic ray flux
   variation around the globe in an unprecedented spacial and time resolution. In the talk, we will
   highlight the details of the detector design, assembly and mass production. An initial test result
   will also be presented.




37th International Cosmic Ray Conference (ICRC 2021)
July 12th – 23rd, 2021
Online – Berlin, Germany

    ∗ Presenter



© Copyright owned by the author(s) under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).           https://pos.sissa.it/
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                       X. He


1. Introduction

      In recent years, there are growing interests in using cosmic ray measurements for applications
in space and the earth weather monitoring, non-invasive void structural tomography, soil moisture
monitoring, radiation effects in health of general population, etc. [1–12] This is in part inspired by
the advancement of particle detection and instrumentation over the past a few decades in accelerator-
based particle and high energy nuclear experiments. However, all of the detectors developed for
cosmic ray measurement have large volumes, complex readout electronics, are expensive, and
not-easy to maintain and operate. While these detectors are operated by experts uniquely at a




                                                                                                          PoS(ICRC2021)1257
given experimental location for their designed research objectives, it is extremely challenging if not
impossible to duplicate the setup in order to perform the measurements at global scale.
      Measurement of cosmic ray flux around the world in real-time is a unique approach for studying
the dynamical correlation between the space/earth weather and the flux variation. This is indeed
very important for understanding the forcing factors of the earth climate change. The solar activity
(like Forbush events) influences geomagnetic field which in turn modulates the cosmic ray shower
distribution at a given geo-position. The earth’s atmosphere itself is a large particle detector in
which the primary cosmic rays interact with atmospheric molecules at an altitude around 15 km
from sea level with seasonal variations. Because of the gravitational binding, to the first order, the
total air mass on earth is more or less a constant but the local air mass varies following the changes
of the local barometric pressure. Measurement of the secondary cosmic ray particles reaching to
the surface of the earth at a global scale in real-time is a unique tool to capture the dynamic weather
patterns worldwide.
      The keys for achieving the global cosmic ray measurement include, but not limited to, a few
critical factors listed as follows:

    • Identical detector design and performance, which eliminate the need for detector acceptance
      correction.

    • Portability and low cost, which enable the construction and distribution of a large number of
      detectors worldwide in a competitive funding environment.

    • Sensitivity to the changes of local meteorological parameters in shorter time frame.

    • Dedicated effort of maintaining and operating the detector continuously.

Based on these requirements, a multi-layer-scintillator cosmic ray telescope have been developed
at Georgia State University (GSU). The design of the scintillator tile is motivated by the excellent
performance of the scintillator tiles for the sPHENIX Hadronic Calorimeter [13]. The readout
consists of a Raspberry PI and a customized PCB which supplies bias-voltage to SiPMs [14] and
records the data in combination of counts both from single layer and coincidences in paired-layers.
     In this proceedings, a brief description of the telescope design and its components is given in
Section 2 which is followed with telescope assembly and test in Section 3. A brief summary and
an outlook of the future of this project are given in Section 4.


                                                  2
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                         X. He




                                                                                                            PoS(ICRC2021)1257
Figure 1: Design of the cosmic ray telescope: (a) Muon telescope; (b) Muon and Neutron telescope; and (c)
Neutron cell.


2. Cosmic Ray Telescope Design

      Following the design goals as mentioned in the previous section, there are three generations of
the cosmic ray telescope that have been developed and tested at GSU since 2016. The latest version
is shown in Fig. 1. There are two types of the telescope design. One is for muon measurement only
and the other with a neutron cell in order to count cosmic ray muons and neutrons simultaneously.
The study of the neutron cell performance and its efficiency is still ongoing.
      The key component of the telescope is the scintillator tile which not only needs to be large
enough for recording statistically meaningful particle hits in a shorter time window (at about a
1-minute level) but also provides uniform scintillation light collection efficiency for hits counting.
The design of the tile is based on the group’s extensive work on building and testing of a Hadronic
Calorimeter of the sPHENIX experiment at Brookhaven National Lab [13]. The tile dimension is
20 cm × 20 cm × 1 cm with a cutoff at a corner in order to mount a PCB board with a silicon
photomultiplier (SiPM) [14]. A wavelength shifting fiber loop is glued into a shallow groove near
the surface of the tile on one side. The fiber ends meet the SiPM at the corner as shown in Fig. 2.
Also shown in Fig. 2 (on right) is a display of scintillation light production and propagation in
the tile using GEANT4 simulation [15] in order to understand the light collection uniformity and
efficiency.
      The readout consists of a Raspberry PI and a custom made 8-channel readout board (the latest
version). Raspberry PI provides an affordable computing and network tool for configuring the
PCB and remote data taking, as shown in Fig. 3. The custom PCB interfaces with the Raspberry
PI through its digital logic pins and provides controllable bias voltage, amplification and signal
shaping, as well as FPGA based logic for coincidence and high speed counting. The interface to the
SiPMs is made through U.FL cables providing the bias voltage and a shielded signal path for noisy
environment. Another advantage of using Raspberry PI is the possibility of integrating low-cost
sensors (GPS, humidity, temperature, inclination, etc.) to the telescope. The readout electronics
are typically mounted on the bottom of the telescope or on its side.


                                                   3
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                               X. He




                                                                                                                  PoS(ICRC2021)1257
Figure 2: The design of the scintillator tile (left figure) and a display of scintillation light production and
propagation inside the tile from a GEANT4-based simulation study.




Figure 3: Raspberry PI-based readout. (upper left) 8-channel FPGA PCB; (lower left) backside of the PCB;
(right) Raspberry PI with the PCB.


     With the 8-channel readout, the telescope design has a greater flexibility in comparison with
our previous prototypes. One can arrange as many as 8 tiles in different combination for a broader
cosmic ray flux measurement with varying sky-facing angular acceptance. In our production
configuration, a three-layer telescope is assembled with a 25 cm separation between the top and
the bottom layer (see Fig. 1) while the middle layer location can be adjusted for choosing a specific
angular acceptance. In order to determine the angular acceptance of a given pair of tiles, a software
package has also been developed using GEANT4 with realistic material property and the exact
geometry as shown in Fig. 4. One can also study the relative efficiency of muon and neutron
measurement using the same software package.


3. Telescope Assembly and Test

    The assembling and testing of the telescopes are mainly carried out by undergraduate and
graduate students. Figure 5 shows two undergraduate students who were assembling telescope
frames during the COVID-19 pandemic in the nuclear physics labs at GSU. We also had two high


                                                      4
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                            X. He




                                                                                                               PoS(ICRC2021)1257
Figure 4: (color online) Acceptance study using GEANT4 simulation. (left panel) muon telescope; (right
panel) muon/neutron telescope. [Red color lines represent negative charged partile tracks, blue for positive
particles and green for charge-neutral particle including gammas and neutrons]




Figure 5: Two undergraduate students working on telescope assembling during COVID-19 pandemic in
2021.


school students who helped on assembling tasks during summer breaks. This project has proven to
be a great tool for STEM training, which is one of the objectives of the cosmic ray project at GSU.
     Our near-term goal is to assemble 50 three-layer telescopes by the end of 2021 and to make a
plan for a worldwide distribution. There are close to 200 scintillator tiles made for this distribution.
Half of the 200 tiles were fabricated in the physics shop at GSU while the newest tiles were made
by Uniplast in Russia (the same company that produced the scintillator tiles for the sPHENIX
experiment). Figure 6 shows a box of tile shipment from Uniplast (right) together with a picture
of the fiber ends. Having tiles made locally provides a great opportunity for our students to learn
polishing tiles and gluing wavelength shifting fibers.
     Once a telescope is assembled, a multi-week test is run to study its performance and stability.


                                                     5
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                            X. He




                                                                                                               PoS(ICRC2021)1257
            Figure 6: Scintillator tiles (ready to be installed) produced by Unplast in Russian.




Figure 7: Test setups for monitoring the telescope performance and stability. (left) muon telescope; (right)
muon/neutron telescope.


A typical test is to record a minute-long flux counts (counts from single layers and counts of
coincidence from a pair of layers) 24/7 and to check the sensitivity of the flux variations to the
changes of the space radiation level (i.e., solar activity) and the local meteorological parameters.
Figure 7 shows two such setups which have been recording data continuously for several months.
     An example of the data analysis is shown in Fig. 8. The time series plots of a hourly coincidence
flux in each of the paired-layer show the well-known seasonable variation of the cosmic ray muon
flux reaching to the surface of the earth. Also shown in Fig. 8 is the sensitivity of the flux variation
to a Forbush-like event. Arranging equal layer separation of the top-middle and the middle-bottom
pair provides a self-consistent check of the telescope performance.


4. Summary and Outlook

     We present in this proceedings an updated cosmic ray telescope design, assembly and test. The
main advantages of this telescope design includes its low cost, portable nature, and flexibility for
adding additional environmental sensors for broader applications of the cosmic ray measurement at
a global scale. This opens up the unprecedented opportunity to built a realistic and identical cosmic
ray detector network around the world for space and earth weather monitoring.


                                                     6
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                     X. He




                                                                                                        PoS(ICRC2021)1257
Figure 8: Example of data analysis. The top panel shows the hourly coincidence counts between the the
top and the middle layer. The middle and the bottom panel show the corresponding hourly flux from the
middle-bottom and top-bottom paired layers, respectively.


     This project also opens up a great opportunity for STEM outreach both in regional and
worldwide effort to share the learning experience beyond the age gaps and the culture difference.
We are looking forward to establishing a worldwide consortium to distribute, install, and operate
this network.

References

 [1] Borozdin, K. N. and et al. 2003, Surveillance: Radiographic imaging with cosmic-ray muons,
     Nature, 422, 277.

 [2] Borozdin, K. et al. 2012, Cosmic Ray Radiography of the Damaged Cores of the Fukushima
     Reactors, PRL, 109, 152501.

 [3] Kunihiro Morishima and et al. 2017, Discovery of a big void in Khufu’s Pyramid by obser-
     vation of cosmic-ray muons, Nature, 552, 386-390.

 [4] G. Zumerle and et al. 2018, The Cosmic Muon Tomography (CMT) Project, http://
     mutomweb.pd.infn.it

 [5] Jasper Kirkby, 2007, Cosmic Rays and Climate, Surv. Geophys, 28, 333-375.

 [6] Lu, Q.B. 2009, Correlation between Cosmic Rays and Ozone Depletion, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
     102(11), 118501.

 [7] A. Ollila 2012, Changes in cosmic ray fluxes improve correlation to global warming, Int. J.
     Phys. Scie., 7, 822-826.

 [8] N. J. Shaviv 2005, On climate response to changes in the cosmic ray flux and radiative budget,
     J. Geophys. Res, 110, A08105.


                                                 7
Modular and Portable Cosmic Ray Telescope                                                   X. He


 [9] Henrik Svensmark 1998, Influence of Cosmic Rays on Earth’s Climate, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81,
     5027-5030.

[10] Kennedy, A. R. 2014, Biological Effects of Space Radiation and Development of Effective
     Countermeasures, Life Scie. Space Res., 1, 10-43.

[11] Mertens, C. J. and et al. 2013, Space Weather, 11(10), 603-635.

[12] Wilson, J.W., & Mertens, C.J., & Goldhagan, P., & Copeland, K., & Bidasaria, H. B. 2005,
     Atmospheric ionizing radiation and human exposure (NASA Technical Paper, NASA/TP-




                                                                                                     PoS(ICRC2021)1257
     2005-213935, Washington, D. C.)

[13] C. A. Aidala et al., Design and Beam Test Results for the sPHENIX Electromagnetic and
     Hadronic Calorimeter Prototypes, in IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 65, no. 12,
     pp. 2901-2919, Dec. 2018. doi: 10.1109/TNS.2018.2879047

[14] Multi-pixel photon counter (SiPM): https://www.hamamatsu.com/resources/pdf/
     ssd/s13360_series_kapd1052e.pdf.

[15] J. Allison, et al., Recent developments in Geant4, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
     Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, Vol-
     ume 835, 2016, Pages 186-225, ISSN 0168-9002, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2016.06.125.




                                                8
